What can the African savannah
teach us about AI?
Take this journey with me.
Across Africa,
proverbs are a cornerstone
of the oral tradition
through which Indigenous
knowledge and wisdom
has been passed down
from generation to generation.
The Yoruba people of Nigeria
say that a proverb is the horse
that can carry one swiftly
to the discovery of ideas.
One of my favorite proverbs says,
when elephants fight,
it's the grass that suffers.
And it has guided me in making sense
of much in the world today,
especially with all
the developments in AI.
The elephants can symbolize great powers,
be they nation states, corporations,
broligarchies,
while the grass comprises people,
geographies and ecologies
considered resources to exploit,
wastelands or charity cases.
Great power competition,
as we're living through today,
emphasizes the power
of the metaphorical elephants
in their quest for dominance
over resources, ideas and innovations.
In the case of Africa,
not only are we caught in the middle,
but we comprise a key battleground
over which elephants are fighting
over natural and human resources
to power the intelligent age.
Meanwhile, our perspectives and ambitions
tend to be drowned out
by the din of the elephants.
But what can we discover
when we look past the elephants fighting
and zoom in on the grass?
Well, for one, we can learn a simple
yet profound concept:
I am because you are.
This sums up a set of value systems
that emerged among
the Bantu people of Africa,
and is known as “utu” in Eastern Africa
and “ubuntu” in South Africa.
Utu and ubuntu instill in us
a profound appreciation of humanity
as a quality we owe one another.
And it's not just about
the relationship between humans.
Ubuntu is also about our relationship
with nature and the spiritual or cosmic.
Ubuntu reminds us we ought
to be developing technologies like AI
for the benefit of all
of humanity and our ecology.
Across Africa, we have exciting examples
of embracing the wisdom of ubuntu
to inform data governance,
AI product design and community building.
I call it ubuntech.
(Laughter)
AI development today treats data
as if it's an abundant natural resource,
and we hear this in sayings
like, “data is the new oil.”
But already the limits
of this paradigm are being realized,
as researchers have been
sounding the alarm
that high-quality data
to train AI models is drying up.
Through ubuntu, we conceptualize
data differently,
and we appreciate that it represents
lives, cultures and communities,
so that data governance for us
is about the meaningful participation,
informed consent, self-determination
and community ownership
of data sets from which language,
nature-based knowledge
and Indigenous wisdom are derived.
(Applause)
Thank you.
And this has inspired
a concept like data justice
in our African policy frameworks.
Data justice matters
because it means that women,
rural women in Africa, for example,
who possess unique
knowledge about agriculture,
food production, medicine
and environmental protection
are represented and visible
in data systems
and agritech solutions.
Then, when we've been told
ours are low-resource languages,
we're resourcing our languages.
Conventional AI wisdom
demands large language models,
but African practitioners are making do
with little language models.
See, driven by efficiency as a core value
and inspired by our relation to nature,
initiatives like Lelapa AI have developed
lightweight African language models
that are serving our communities
without requiring extensive resources.
Their Inkuba small language model
has been inspired by the dung beetle,
which can roll up to 250
times its body weight.
It's small but mighty.
Inkuba is trained
on 0.4 billion parameters
and outperforms larger models
in sentiment analysis
and displays remarkable consistency
across multiple languages.
We're also building
collaborative AI communities.
We have Masakhane, or building together,
across over 30 African countries,
to strengthen natural
language processing in our research.
And this grassroots organizing approach
has set out to demonstrate
that low-resourceness of languages
is not a data problem,
but a societal one
best solved through participation.
In fact, Masakhane have developed
a non-traditional authorship model
that acknowledges and includes
all contributors in published papers.
Be it that you contributed data,
lived experience, coded software
or coordinated research participation.
And this way, they've been able
to publish translation results
for over 38 African languages.
These examples of ubuntech
are our way of charting
an alternative path
to developing and deploying
AI solutions in Africa
by Africa and beneficial for Africa.
Ubuntech matters for a number of reasons.
For one, we are asserting agency
to conceive and build AI futures
beyond just the ambition
of the metaphorical elephants
and to contribute to a global commons.
It also allows us to bring forward
the Indigenous wisdom of our ancestors
so that ubuntech
is artificial intelligence
powered by ancestral intelligence.
(Applause)
And we also get to remind the elephants,
they may fight and wield
their might all they want,
but they are also bound to suffer
if they trample upon the grass
to the point of irreparable
damage or extinction.
But when their power is exercised
in relation to others,
it makes them ecosystem engineers
and redirects their energy
towards helping sustain a healthy
and beneficial environment for everyone.
And we see this in the savanna.
When African elephants leverage
their power to trample upon dense shrubs
and acacia trees,
they make room for smaller
species to coexist.
When they disperse seeds
as they trek across the land,
they help generate new growth
and maintain the biodiversity
of the savanna ecosystem.
So in relationality, in coexistence,
the power of the elephants is majestic.
And it's a life force
for themselves, other wildlife,
and the savanna ecosystem.
I believe if we can reimagine humanity
beyond just the ambition
of the metaphorical elephants,
we can realize a world
that benefits everyone.
So I implore all of you,
take heed of the grass beneath your feet.
Our collective future depends on it.
Asanteni.
(Cheers and applause)